September 14, a beautiful, clear, bright, sunny day in central Missouri, sitting at the home of George and Joy Shelton, getting ready to chat with Dr. Shelton about his recollections of some A&M years.
George, now let's test your microphone.
Say a sentence or so.
So what now?
That's enough.
Oh, oh.
George, you enrolled the first time at A&M in what year?
September the 27th, 1945.
Okay.
I had two years of college work that I had completed at what was then John Tarleton Agricultural College.
For the sake of someone who might not be
completely familiar with your background.
If you will, tell us where you grew up and experience of that sort before you came to A&M.
I grew up at Stephenville, Texas.
Lived there the first 18 years of my life.
Was a farm boy.
We lived on a very small depression-ridden farm in south of Stephenville, a few miles.
And what encouraged you to go to college in the first place?
Well, I think that question depends on the timing.
For young men and women that lived in the 30s, growing up in the 30s, maturing, finishing high school and so forth, I think there was a feeling that education might be the only way out
of what was then really a rural ghetto.
And so, although I grew up in a family that didn't have higher education at all, neither my mother or father had finished high school, but from my earliest days of recollection,
I was encouraged to get every bit of education I could and so when I graduated from high school I started to John Tarleton and I worked at home milk cows before going to school and hauled the milk in myself on the way to school and
was able to get two years in, equivalent of two years in college before I was drafted into the armed services in late 1942.
Had of course
hadn't been out of high school but about, what would it have been, about eight, seven, eight months when we had Pearl Harbor and associated incidents.
And so because our nation was so far behind in military preparation and preparedness, there was no way they could
take all the young men that were 18 to 20 years old immediately.
So they allowed us to stay in school a few months, and I was able to stay until December 1942.
And actually didn't go on active duty until about, let's see, about the second or third day of 1943.
as you were studying at Tarleton, did you have an academic goal, a major, a profession already in mind?
Yes, Haskell, I had a goal.
I didn't know that I could achieve it, but I wanted to be a veterinarian.
And I took what they called at that point a pre-vet curriculum of two years.
which I did in quite a bit less than two years because I went to school in the summer of 42.
As you look back on that program, given your experience to date, how adequate was that program if it was only going to be a two-year period of study?
If I couldn't have gotten anything but those two years?
For pre-vet?
Oh, it was fine for pre-vet.
Actually, at that point in time, one year was all that was required.
And it had to be a certain arrangement of chemistry and mathematics and so forth.
But one year was all that was required.
It was raised to two years right after World War II ended.
uh... but i had uh... my my pre-professional work was all right i uh... tell you a little story about uh... well maybe i'm getting ahead of myself uh... when i finished uh... uh... the first two years of uh... work there and and went into the armed services i was in
almost three years, about two years and eight or nine months.
And when the war ended so suddenly, as it did in 1945, almost unbelievably,
none of us realized that we could be mustered out so fast.
I had returned from overseas in late April, early May of 1945 and sent to Ellington Field, Texas.
where I was literally marking time.
Didn't really have much need for me.
And so when the war ended so quickly, I was able to, I had my, the transcript of my two years at Tarleton that I had gotten on when I stopped with my parents' farm in Stephenville and I took it back to
with me to Ellington.
And so when it looked like I was going to be mustered out, I was thinking about how to get in school as soon as I could.
And I went to, well, I guess I didn't actually go to see Dr. Marcella, who was dean, until I was discharged.
But on my way home, I stopped by a car station
and saw Dr. Marcella, and I had no idea what to expect.
And unknown to me at that time, his health was beginning to break.
But I stopped in his office and showed him my meager credentials and told him that I would like to go to veterinary school.
He looked at my transcript and he said, well, you don't have one course that we require.
I said, you don't have the right agricultural chemistry course.
So I said, all right, what do I have to do?
I have to take another semester.
And of course, I knew I couldn't get in except in the fall.
Oh, I said, you can take it with the other work.
The semester, the first year in veterinary school was something like 18 hours.
And I had to add five hours on top of that.
So I had a pretty good load.
I had no idea what I could do with it.
All right, now this is the fall of 40?
45.
And?
The war had, I was discharged on the 22nd, entered veterinary school the 27th of September.
September.
All right, now one of my first questions normally, if I'm talking to someone who is an undergraduate, would be why did you attend A&M?
Well, you attended A&M because it was the only vet school in the state.
And when you came back to enroll, you had been there two, how many times had you visited A&M before you came to enroll?
How many times had you been to college?
Maybe for, maybe one time for about two hours.
Okay.
What did you bring with you physically?
What, as a student, what did you, what did you carry?
What stuff?
Now, if you recall what it was like in 1945, that question may be moot.
You couldn't buy anything.
I had no clothes, no civilian clothes, because I gained a little bit of weight.
And anyway, what I had left that I'd left back in 42 were mostly rags anyway.
So I couldn't buy a shirt.
I couldn't buy trousers.
I couldn't buy a car.
I couldn't buy anything, really.
Because it was nothing for sale.
And you didn't have a typewriter.
Oh, I didn't have a typewriter.
I didn't know how to type anyway.
How did you get there from Stephenville?
Well, usually I was able to catch rides.
But that day, I had my father's old Plymouth, 1936 Plymouth, that I had gotten when I was at home just a few days before I got a weekend pass.
Caught a ride home, took the old Plymouth back to Ellington.
So I was actually driving his car then, which I went on home and left.
Caught a ride back.
So you came down to begin classes.
Where did you live?
Lived almost all the way through.
I lived in the old brick building right down south of Cebisa.
I'm trying to call it Howell Hall, but that isn't right.
Hilton Hall Hall.
Now, was that building occupied by a number of professional and or graduate students?
Who else was in that building?
All the students that were non-core, non-reg.
A lot of non-reg students, engineers, veterinarian students, the works.
Describe as well as you can recall it, what was the student body like in the fall of 1945?
It was very definitely a two-segment situation.
The core was still strong and there were a lot of youngsters.
My veterinary class that I entered in in the fall of 1945 had about one third kiddos that had just finished one year or two years of pre-professional requirement.
They were very military and the rest of them were veterans.
And some of them were veterans that were returning that had been either wounded or suffered some kind of disability.
There weren't many in my category.
They had just gotten out.
Because I was very, very fortunate to have, I was in the Southwest Pacific.
I was through a lot of battle zones, and they had a point system.
And you got five points for this and 10 points for that.
Of course, I had little less than three years of service, so I didn't have enough points in time and grade.
but I had a lot of, earned a lot of extra points, so it seemed to me like you had to have 85 points, and maybe I had 86 or something like that.
I don't remember that, but it is something like that.
Do you remember how much money you brought with you?
How much money I brought with me?
Did you have a pocket full of cash?
I suppose.
No, I don't remember, but it wasn't very much.
See, I was able to go to school on the GI Bill.
And you remember, what was that called, technically?
GI Bill, it was a Veterans Support Act or something of Congress that had been passed just a few months before.
And so they paid $50 a month and your tuition.
But the $50 a month, you had to get your room and board and all your incidentals and everything.
And that, of course, the dollars were a great deal different in 1945, but that still was pension.
And so it wasn't too long.
The first raise we got, maybe after a semester, I think it went to $65 a month.
And we were in clover then, you know.
Now, you were talking about clothing being scarce.
Did you wear some old GI clothing?
For a while.
It was whatever you could get.
I'm sure if you had pictures of those first classes, it was a model to crew.
About, as far as you remember, about how many were in the entering class at the vet school that fall?
We had, they took 64.
64.
I'm not absolutely sure we had 64.
I think it may have been more like 60, and they added a few students that had dropped out after one semester, been called into service, and that sort of thing.
Do you remember anything about how they received you and your classmates
that first day or two?
How did they welcome you?
How did they assimilate you?
I'm not sure that the university campus people had any idea what to do.
They still didn't know how to integrate the veterans with the Corps kids.
And for a few days we had to eat over in the Corps area.
And, of course, you're supposed to jump up and down and know all the words for the food and all of that.
And veterans that had been shot up in France or flown 50 missions in Germany, they weren't too interested in that, you know.
So it wasn't, it didn't take but just a little until they began to separate them, get them separated as quickly as they could.
They wasn't going to work.
Where did you all eat things?
Where did you eat then after the separation?
Back at Sabisa.
What was the name of that dorm where I lived all that time?
I tried to call it Hilton, but Halton?
Heaton?
No.
Oh, I don't know.
At the vet school, was there any kind of welcome?
Did the dean or anybody welcome new students?
Almost none.
We were told where to go to class.
Describe the campus physically as it was then.
What important buildings were where?
Well, there was the new area, and we all called it that, you know, the new area.
That was where most of the things were going on.
Then the older part of the campus, the dormitories were kind of a hodgepodge, as still is today, those that are still standing there.
And by the way, the one I can't remember the name of, it's still standing.
It was refurbished, remodeled, and still there.
So, of course, the campus was much smaller, but not a great deal different.
Where was the vet school then?
The veterinary school was down on the east end of Ross Street.
Still there.
Now I think occupied by...
One of the engineering colleges.
Maybe chemical engineering or one of those.
And the entire vet school was in that one building?
All except Francis Hall.
Where were the facilities for the animals?
Back on what is now the golf course.
Back to the east.
And there was Dr. Leonard had a little
garden-like area just to the north of the veterinary facilities where they kept some old skates, horses that could barely walk, starve to death.
And the neighboring community didn't care for that.
So they gave the veterinary college a little more land that wouldn't be quite so obvious by the highway.
The highway came in from Bryan then.
And that first fall, which courses gave you the greatest difficulty?
And which faculty do you remember with greatest respect from that first year?
The first year?
Well, the first year, there were about three courses that were considered the weed-out courses.
Of course, gross anatomy was one of them.
It was what we called osteology, myology, and angiology.
The bone structure, then the muscle criteria, and then the vessels, nerves, and so forth.
The first course was taught by a man by the name of Sam Cruz.
K-R-U-E-Z-E, I believe, something like that.
And Sam was a diabetic, and unknown to any of us, he was a great actor.
He didn't give you much reason for why you were studying the bones and why you were studying them first and why you ought to learn about them.
Sam assumed that you ought to know if you were going to be a veterinarian.
So he had a stone face.
We all called him old stone face.
He never smiled.
Sit up in the front of the room and he had a project that he was doing that had an old leather jacket and he was disassembling it and teasing all of the string out of it.
And so
The first exams is one of the highlights of my memory because I had been a pretty good student, I thought, adequate anyway, in my pre-veterinary years.
I had a little maturity on me by then and thought I knew something.
We had the first exam.
They called them the letter exams.
They probably still had those when you came in.
Well, we took the A exam or the E or whatever the first one was.
And I thought, well, that wasn't too bad.
Of course, we heard.
We heard all the rumors about how bad it was.
I didn't think it was all that bad.
So we got it.
We got the exam like on a, we took it on a Thursday or Friday.
And we didn't get it back in the middle of next week.
And
When I got mine back, it looked like it had been bleeding for weeks.
Sam used a red pencil heavy whip, and that thing was marked from one side to the other and up and down.
I got a grade of something like 62 or 64.
Well, I tell you, I was pretty put out.
I didn't know what in the world to think.
I thought, if I thought I was doing fairly well, then I'd get a grade like this.
So I very, very well remember that we all sat there in a sudden shock.
But I thought, well, I know what I can do.
So after it was over, it was a very short distance over to the main administration building, as you recall.
So I walked over there to see what would be involved if I made a quick transfer.
And maybe I wouldn't lose any time.
Funny thing about it was that young men at that time that had spent three years, four years, some of them even five, in military service, we thought our lives had passed us by.
And we didn't want to lose another minute.
Well, I knew I didn't want to be a victim of that hemorrhagic situation.
I found out what I could do and how I could transfer, and I said, well.
Then I talked to some of the others, and they said, well, we better hang with it a little while longer.
But it helped a little bit when I found out that 62 or 64, whatever it was, wasn't a bad grade.
So I felt a little better.
Anyway, then I had Dr. Burns, Patton W. Burns.
He was literally a
historical figure on campus and a wonderful old gentleman.
But he was tough, too.
It had to be like Patton wanted it.
And then I had Dr. Ralph Dunn, who later became the dean after Dr. Marstella had to give up the position.
And he was a pathologist, and he was a great teacher, the best, but tough, too.
There weren't a bunch of easy, there weren't snaps there.
But there were a wonderful group of teachers, most of them, a couple exceptions.
During those first months, to whom did you turn, if you needed advice, counsel?
I didn't.
It was a peculiar thing.
All advice you got then was from upperclassmen.
All right, now, but none of them would have been veterans, would they?
Most of them were not.
Okay.
Not for a year.
That's what I think.
Now, see, what had happened, some of them had gotten one year in vet school, called active duty, some two.
So after a bit, they began to string back in.
But that first semester or two, well, you just didn't have much help, or I didn't.
Now, I think some of them probably felt, some of the students felt comfortable with going to people like Dr. Kirk or Dr. John Milliff, who was one of the great teachers I ever saw anywhere, any time.
Let's stay with him.
What made him great?
Why do you give him high marks?
He knew his subject for one thing.
He absolutely wasn't.
He taught anatomy, but he was just as good or better a pathologist.
So he was able to show us why we needed to learn anatomy.
But we didn't get him for the second or third semester.
And what were his
And then he was just a wonderful man, gentle, calm man.
He never embarrassed a student.
Just one of those men that they don't make many of.
Now he must have had a nickname.
What was Dr. Miller's nickname?
Dr. John's all I ever heard.
That's all I've ever heard.
Yeah.
I never heard anything else.
Let's see, I started to say Turk, that's not right.
Who was it you mentioned a while ago, another old timer, a faculty member?
Burns.
No, and Burns, I'm trying to think of somebody else.
Dr. Burns, Dr. Eads, I didn't mention Dr. Eads, he was in the same department, he was pharmacology.
There's another, we'll get back to him.
Now let's see, what was a typical, that first year,
What was a typical day?
You got up at what time, went to eat, went to... Well, for me, because I was taking the five hours additional work, a typical day involved going to class somewhere around 8 o'clock and sometimes finishing at 5.30, 6 o'clock.
How many of those hours were in the classroom and how many in the lab?
In the classroom there would be structured classes, lectures, and that was what they taught by then was mostly lectures.
There would have been five to six hours of lecture a day and all three to six hours of lab.
That's Monday through Friday, then Saturday.
Saturday we had classes also then.
Those are finished on the
accelerated program, we had classes till noon on Saturday.
Usually we had lectures, Monday, Wednesday, Friday, Tuesday, Thursday, Saturday.
You got up about what time?
On Saturday?
No, no, on a typical class day.
Did you get up and go to breakfast?
Yeah, I did, because I think I could have made it without some breakfast.
Did y'all go through a chai line?
Yeah.
We had kind of a cafeteria style.
Buffet style.
In Cebiza?
Cebiza.
I ate in Cebiza almost the whole time I was there.
Where did you learn all of the Aggie lingo?
I never did know it all.
But I learned a lot of it from the kids that were CORE members.
And we learned a little of it that first two or three weeks.
when they made us eat in the cafeteria in the core area.
Oh, okay.
Because they wouldn't give you anything unless you knew it was bully or, you know, what it was, what the word for it was.
All right, and so all your meals were cafeteria style?
Virtually all.
Okay.
Of the food that you remember, what were your favorites and your least favorite?
Which food did they do that was really...
special and there must have been two or three things you didn't like?
Oh, I'm sure there were.
That's quite a hard question for me to answer because I don't really remember that too well.
See, I'd come back from the Southwest Pacific and I had nothing to eat there but powdered foods.
Powdered sugar, I mean powdered potatoes, powdered milk, everything you could dehydrate.
That's all you got.
They couldn't get any fresh food at all.
So when we got to A&M and we saw things like oranges or lettuce, or even though I don't like lettuce all that much, or the cold broccoli, and then, oh, we just thought that was just like, you know, out of this world.
I was in heaven already.
For the food in Cebesa, I never had any gripe.
And so I can't answer your question, really.
All right, let's see.
In the dormitories, did you do your studying in the dorm?
Usually.
Describe your dorm room.
My dorm room was, oh, golly.
I wish I could think of that blooming name.
The first semester I was in school, I had a roommate that was, I think, something like an arts and science kid.
And he was playboy, didn't study, and of course here I am in veterinary medicine, and I had my nose buried in the book till 10, 11, 12 o'clock every night.
Then the next day, next semester, I roomed with a man by the name of Willie Trajan.
And Willie's still living.
He was a little older than I am, but he lived and practiced in East Texas and in Louisiana.
We were both, I guess, in today's language, we were nerds.
We kept our nose clean in the books.
Our biggest entertainment was, oh, whatsoever weekend, not every weekend, but maybe once a month or so, we'd go out to that...
Now, I should have looked up some of these names.
I can't recall what they...